In research NLP these days, there's always
a lot of talk of probabilistic models and
machine learning.
But if you actually look at
large systems under the hood,
what you'll almost always find is that
they also make quite a bit of use
of regular expressions in various places.
And for many tasks,
it turns out that regular expressions
are just a very practical and
capable way of specifying various
kinds of natural language patterns.
I'm going to show you one example of this
now, by showing you how we use regular
expressions for the English Tokenizer
inside the Stanford NLP tools such as
the Power Zone, Part-Of-Speech Tagger,
or for the coreNLP Suite, overall.
Okay, here we are with the code for
the Stanford English Tokenizer.
So what it is, is it's a large
deterministic regular expression.
And so, what it's written in
is with a tool called JFlex.
So, JFlex belongs to a family of,
what are commonly called in
computer science, lexers.
Which is just another word for tokenizers,
which take a sequence of characters and
cut pieces,
one token at a time off the front of it.
So there was the original
Lex part of Unix, and
then Flex, and this is JFlex which
is a java-compatible version.
Let's scroll down to where some of
the regular expressions are used to define
character classes.
Often, what you find is that many of the
regular expressions aren't actually very
complicated, that they're really nothing
more than lists that have been put into
regular expressions by putting vertical
bars in between for automation.
And so for example,
we see that in several places here.
So here, we have one for
abbreviated months.
And here, we have one for
abbreviated days of the week.
And that continues on for some of these
other ones like, American states and
various other kinds of person name,
title acronyms, down here.
But, let's go on a little bit
further to one that's a bit more
interesting than that.
Okay, so here's one for phone numbers.
This is the kind of ill-documented
regular expression that's a little
bit hard to actually get your head
around but are much used in practice.
So at the very top level
of this regular expression,
things are divided up by
this automation right here.
And on the right-hand side of
the automation there's a pattern
where the separator is being used as dots.
And so, that one's separated
out as consistent use of dots,
because otherwise it's easy for the
regular expression to get it wrong, and
also recognize various kinds of
decimal numbers, and other patters.
And so, that part of it is
actually the easier part.
So, we can have at the beginning
option way, the use of plus signs.
Which are used in Europe and
most of the rest of the world, as the
international prefix for country codes.
And then,
we can have the country code here,
which is just numbers of the range 2 to 4,
and then all of that is optional.
And then, after that we've got a first set
of numbers which can be the area code.
The dot, then the second set of numbers,
which I guess historically
was the exchange.
And then finally,
the third set of numbers.
And so, these sets of numbers
are then being given a length.
So this has to be between 3 and 4 numbers.
This has to be 3 and 5 numbers.
And the area code has to be 2 and
4 numbers, and so,
those ranges are chosen so
that they'll work
with the phone numbers of a bunch
of the countries around the world.
But if you know, well, your international
phone numbers, you'll realize there
are actually some cases that won't
still be recognized by those.
So what then, if we go to the left-hand
side of the regular expression?
It's effectively doing the same thing but
is more complex.
So, that the first part of it is,
again, going to recognize things
like optional country codes.
So, you can see the same piece over here.
And the optional country code.
But it's allowing in
some other possibilities.
So here we've escaped the parentheses, so
you can actually sort of have some numbers
that are put inside of parentheses.
And further on, we've got this
character class where we're allowing
a variety of other separators
apart from period.
So, we can have a dash,
which again, needs to be escaped.
There can just be a space, or
there can be a non-breaking space.
So, here's a Unicode escape for
non-breaking space.
And so, then overall,
this will allow it to recognize
a bunch of formats for phone numbers.
So, it'll recognize almost all
American phone numbers and
generate us pretty well with things
like UK and Australian phone numbers.
If you want an example of where it doesn't
work, the normal phone number format
in France is you just have pairs of
digits with spaces in between them,
and that's not included here.
And the difficulty isn't writing
a regular expression that matches that,
it's in this context of deterministic
regular expression matcher.
Or, managing to write one which won't also
wrongly match various other things such as
numbers that are just appearing
as a sequence of numbers, for
some other reason.
Well, I hope that's given you some idea
of the use of regular expressions in NLP
systems.
If you poke around in other NLP systems,
I'm sure you'll find
lots of other examples.
Commonly, when people want to match
particular patterns, whether they
be patterns at the level of words or
patterns at the level of parts of speech.
They can just be very convenient and
practical methods to solve
many practical tasks.